Add policy and description of the retrospective meeting for engineering (#862)
2i2c-org/team-compass: engineering/workflow.md

The goal of this meeting is to review our major work items, synchronize with one another, and prioritize work across team members.

See [the Sprint Planning issue template](https://github.com/2i2c-org/team-compass/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/meeting-sprint-planning.md) for the agenda / structure of these meetings.

(coordination:sprint-board)=
### The Sprint Board

The [Sprint Board](https://github.com/orgs/2i2c-org/projects/49/views/1) is a place to keep track of the [Deliverables and tasks](coordination:deliverables) our team intends to work on for a two week iteration.

> The board is a GitHub Projects board that is populated with with work items during the teams Itereation Planning activity.

Reviewer: Small typo
```suggestion
The board is a GitHub Projects board that is populated with with work items during the teams Iteration Planning activity.
```

Reviewer 2: Thank you.

The team's goal is to complete all items on the Sprint Board by the end of the Sprint.
This is a team commitment - while one person may be assigned to a deliverable, we all commit to working together to get the work done.

:::{admonition} The Sprint Board should...
:class: tip

> - Be driven by 2i2c's product roadmap

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that what we commit to should be influenced by the product roadmap - but its not only about the product roadmap, its also about new hubs, support ticket, and internal engineering work etc right.

I think the related things to possibly say here could be that the sprint board should...
- get items refined during backlog refinement meetings
- get items committed from backlog during iteration planning meetings

Reviewer 2: @consideRatio, please make the edit :)

> - With the exception of support tickets, work items should be related back to Initiatives.

Reviewer: Changing the sentence order to follow the imperative "The Spring Board should ..."
```suggestion
- Contain work items that relate back to Initiatives (with the exception of support tickets).
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Contain work items that relate back to Initiatives (with the exception of support tickets and new cluster/hub requests).
```

I think also new cluster/hub requests are an exception right?

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure. There may be instances where a request is tied to an initiative and there are times it may not.

Reviewer 2: I think it's safe to include the exception and remove it later if this proves to be false.

- Have enough items to keep the team occupied for the two week iteration
- Not have so many items that a team member gets overwhelmed
- Under-estimate our team's total capacity, to provide room for unexpected work (e.g., support work)

> - Have at least one team member assigned to each item on the board

Reviewer 3: We can't reasonably aim to have a team member assigned to each item before they are committed right?

```suggestion
- Have at least one team member assigned to each item on the board's comitted items
```

:::

> The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the teams delivery workflow. The team own the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suit their way of work to optimize for sustainable delivery.

Author: ```suggestion
The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the teams delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suits their way of working to optimize for sustainable delivery.
```

> The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the teams delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suits their way of working to optimize for sustainable delivery.

Reviewer: Small typo
```suggestion
The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the team's delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suits their way of working to optimize for sustainable delivery.
```

> The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the teams delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suits their way of working to optimize for sustainable delivery.

Reviewer: Suggested rewording
```suggestion
The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the teams delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process to best suit their way of working and to optimize for sustainable delivery.
```

Reviewer 3: Resolved in a new non-outdated comment

The current queues of work represented by the board are:

> - {guilabel} `Backlog` represents items that haven't been started and not in Sprint.

Reviewer 3: ![image](https://github.com/2i2c-org/team-compass/assets/3837114/11bebfe6-3b00-4b56-bbef-c77ae6122baf)

I'm new to the `guilabel` thing so I'm not sure on the expected result, but I think this could be a syntax error of having a space between `{guilabel}` and the text in backticks following it.

Reviewer 2: Cool. Thanks!

- {guilabel} `Refined` represents a list of items that have been refined and are ready to be worked on. The items in this queue are not committed items.
- {guilabel} `Committed` items haven't been started and are expected to be completed by end of the Sprint. These items are identified during the Iteration Planning activity.
- {guilabel} `In Progress` represents a queue of items being *actively* worked on. Each item should have at least one owner.
- {guilabel} `In Review/Blocked` contains items that need to be review before being marked as done or that cannot be completed without additional actions/support. A long list of items in this queue indicate deficiencies in the team's Refinement activity.

> - {guilabel} `Done` contains the list of items that are complete! These should be celebrated archived in the next Sprint Planning meeting.

Reviewer: Small typo
```suggestion
- {guilabel} `Done` contains the list of items that are complete! These should be celebrated and archived in the next Sprint Planning meeting.
```

(meetings:retrospective)=
### The Retrospective Meeting

> At the end of each sprint, the team holds a retrospective meeting to reflect and identify actions to improve the team's ways of working and delivery process. The retrospective is the process through which the team achieves continuous improvement for **all** their other process.

Author: ```suggestion
At the end of each sprint, the team holds a retrospective meeting to reflect and identify actions to improve the team's ways of working and delivery process. The retrospective is the process through which the team achieves continuous improvement for **all** their other processes.
```

#### The Duration of the Retrospective

The retrospective is one hour long and is usually held on the last day of each sprint.
It is held at a time to maximise attendance from the engineering team.

On rare occasions, when the team experiences duress or unpredictable and disruptive events, they may choose to have a specific retrospective to learn from those events.

% TODO: Move the meeting into the team calendar for visibility: https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=c_4hjjouojd8psql9i1a8nd1uff4%40group.calendar.google.com

#### The Roster for Facilitating Retrospectives

> There is a [Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1s0ZSAxwFzJ-_WgDkZeicfuUadSFEjkjS6ZcNk4N7Mmg/edit?usp=sharing) in the shared team drive that determines who will be facilitating each retrospective meeting (as well as [sprint planning](meetings:sprint-planning) and backlog refinement meetings).

Reviewer: Should Drive be capitalised? Not certain!

```suggestion
There is a [Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1s0ZSAxwFzJ-_WgDkZeicfuUadSFEjkjS6ZcNk4N7Mmg/edit?usp=sharing) in the shared team Drive that determines who will be facilitating each retrospective meeting (as well as [sprint planning](meetings:sprint-planning) and backlog refinement meetings).
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think in this case. I'm using it like I would the word folder. Would we "...in the shared team **_folder_** that..." vs "...in the shared team **_Folder_** that..."

> Members of the engineering team are expected to self-nominate for this role because it is their improvement process.

Reviewer: Emphasise ownership!
```suggestion
Members of the engineering team are expected to self-nominate for this role because it is _their_ improvement process.
```

#### Retrospective Tool

The team uses an [EasyRetro board](https://easyretro.io/publicboard/A8bu34hcK2eyg0s5MxNX0AfQXG02/7e47da43-a12b-4d21-842d-22361b799a92) to collect cards representing feedback concerning the last sprint.
There are columns for:

- Thanks and Celebrations

> - Things that Went Well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Things That Went Well
```

- Things To Improve
- Actions (Items to take forward into the next sprint).

This template can be changed by tne facilitator. There are [many](https://retromat.org/) different template formats and the facilitator should choose one that is most appropriate for the team's need.

> ### EasyRetro user account

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### EasyRetro user account
```

> We have a paid Team subscription for EasyRetro, to make it easier to facilitate retrospectives. The user account is **admin@2i2c.org**. The credentials are stored in BitWarden.

Author: ```suggestion
We have a paid Team subscription for EasyRetro, to make it easier to facilitate retrospectives. The user account is **admin@2i2c.org**. The credentials are stored in our [shared BitWarden account](https://vault.bitwarden.com/#/vault?organizationId=11313781-4b83-41a3-9d35-afe200c8e9f1).
```

> #### The General Format of a Iteartion Retrospective

Author: ```suggestion
#### The General Format of a Iteration Retrospective
```

The retrospective meeting follows the below outline.

1. _Identify a facilitator._

> The facilitator has the responsibility to:

Reviewer 3: Indentation to align with content below and avoid formatting issues when rendered

```suggestion
    The facilitator has the responsibility to:
```

>     * Ensure that their is psychological safety in the meeting.

Reviewer: Small typo
```suggestion
    * Ensure that there is psychological safety in the meeting.
```

Reviewer: @haroldcampbell could you perhaps suggest a helpful URL to define psychological safety? Perhaps that's not necessary, but your input is appreciated! :)

Reviewer 2: Cool. Will do.

    * Ensure that the meeting isn't used as a blaming/ranting/finger pointing session.
    * Share the [Retrospective Prime directive](https://retrospectivewiki.org/index.php?title=The_Prime_Directive) with the participants.

1. _Set the context for the Iteration retrospective._

>    This involves explaining the period under observation, which process we are trying to improve and what has be achieved by the current process. This could involve reviewing the 'Done' column in [](coordination:sprint-board).

Author: ```suggestion
   This involves explaining the period under observation, which process(es) we are trying to improve and what has been achieved by the current process. This could involve reviewing the 'Done' column in [](coordination:sprint-board).
```

1. _Review the previous retrospective actions._

    Reviewing previous retrospective actions involves:

    * checking if the team completed all of the previous actions that they committed to
    * noting how many actions were completed
    * briefly discussing if the action has had the intended impact.

>    Retrospective actions are stored in the team's Sprint board and are tagged with the `Retro action` label.

Reviewer: @haroldcampbell @consideRatio can I confirm my understanding:

By the time that we're reviewing retrospective actions, we're only looking at _committed_ actions (i.e. actions that were created in the previous sprint, and then refined and committed to in the iteration planning meeting. 

As such, by the time of the _next_ retrospective, we should have finished all of those actions i.e. there's no need to "drop them" here.

To be clear, that's what has been written here, I just wanted to confirm.

Reviewer 2: Yes. Ideally, by the time of the next retrospective, we should have finished those actions. However, it's not a Black and White situation. There are going to be those actions that will (because of their nature) take more than a single iteration.

The key thing that I'm trying to communicate is that:

- Retro actions should be treated like work, because they are.
- Retro actions may need refining and will definitely need to meet the team's definition of ready. 
- Retro actions should make there way into the team's committed queue via Iteration Planning. The exceptions I think is when someone outside of the team is going to implement the actions (e.g. myself or Damián). In thoses cases, we'll still be governed by a WIP limit from either the Initiatives or Operations board.

Reviewer: That matches my internal thinking exactly.

Reviewer 3: I'm aligned with thinking above - but I didn't translate that clearly to the commented section. I'll review the section again and mark this as resolved.

1. _Set aside time for the team reflect and capture input on cards._

   Team members need ample time to reflect on their work, interactions and the effectiveness of process from the past iteration. This time will vary based on the size of the team, the duration of the retrospective and temperament of the team.

   This duration of this step is usually between 5 - 15 minutes.

   In some cases, the team is invited to pre-populate the board with input before the actual retrospective.

1. _~~Everyone reads through (quietly to themselves) the~~ Thanks and Celebrations_

    Ultimately, the team needs to find a way to celebrate each other. In some cases, this may be simply the team reading the cards themselves or the facilitator doing this.

1. _Create shared understanding on Went Well, and To Improve columns._

   During this time, the facilitator groups the cards into themes (in the form of hashtags), potentially merging similar cards.

1. _Discussion amongst the team on the To Improve items._

   For cards that are unclear, the facilitator should encourage the person that wrote the card to provide context. Team members can ask clarifying questions of each other.

>    **NOTE**: It is important to discourage "solutioning" at this stage.

Reviewer: Use admonition
```suggestion
   :::{note}
   It is important to discourage "solutioning" at this stage.
   :::
```

1. _Voting on the To Improve items._

   The team can then vote on which To Improve items they think are the most important.

   _For example: Each member gets 3 votes that they can distribute as they see fit, e.g., give all 3 votes to one item, 2 to one item and 1 to another, or 1 vote for 3 items._

1. _Identify actions._

   For the top-voted actions (limited to only 2 or 3), the team generates some concrete actions to try and resolve the issues.
   These are captured in the Action Items column.

1. _Close the meeting._

>   After the meeting, the facilitator is responsible for converting the Action Items into GitHub issues to be refined for the next sprint, and then clearing the retro board.

Reviewer 3: Let's hook into the process of backlog refinement and iteration planning

```suggestion
  After the meeting, the facilitator is responsible for converting the Action Items into GitHub issues to be put in the sprint board's backlog column, and then clearing the retro board.
```

Reviewer 2: Okay.

#### When should the Retro Board be Populated

> Ideally, the team is expected to populate the retrospective board during the meeting. However, team members can pre-populate the board prior to the meeting if they have fleeting thoughts they'd like to capture throughout the sprint.

Reviewer 3: I'd appreciate having a pre-decided time for just-in-time writing during the meeting, and also to encourage us to write things down in advance if we can't d

```suggestion
Team members are expected to try populate the board ahead of time to the extent that what remains could be written down in five minutes just-in-time during the meeting.
```

Author: Yes - I think it's important to maximise active discussion time during the meeting, given how costly it is to a distributed team to have sync meetings.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to defer to the team. However, I want to make this comment because I see it differently:

1. I understand that synchronous meetings are expensive. 
2. However, creating human connections is equally valuable... and we create them in the margins of the mundane.

#### How do Generated Actions move into and get committed to the Team's Next Sprint?

> The general rule is that actions are also work and should be prioritized like any other work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The general rule is that actions are also work and should be refined and prioritized like any other work.
```

As such actions will enter the team's next sprint through the following process:

> 1. At the end of the retrospective, the facilitator should create issues representing the actions on the Team's iteration board, in the `Backlog` or `Refined` queue depending on the level of detail/information detailed in the action. 

Reviewer 3: > The general rule is that actions are also work and should be refined and prioritized like any other work.

The leading paragraph quoted above combined with whats written here is sufficient for this heading I think.

By removing the rest of the headings content we avoid repeating process details on backlog refinement and iteration planning that I think we ought to assume is known and documented elsewhere when writing this section.

Reviewer 2: Cool.

(coordination:sprint-board)=
### The Sprint Board

The [Sprint Board](https://github.com/orgs/2i2c-org/projects/49/views/1) is a place to keep track of the [Deliverables and tasks](coordination:deliverables) our team intends to work on for a two week iteration.

The board is a GitHub Projects board that is populated with with work items during the teams Iteration Planning activity.

The team's goal is to complete all items on the Sprint Board by the end of the Sprint.
This is a team commitment - while one person may be assigned to a deliverable, we all commit to working together to get the work done.

:::{admonition} The Sprint Board should...
:class: tip
- Be driven by 2i2c's product roadmap
- With the exception of support tickets, work items should be related back to Initiatives.
- Have enough items to keep the team occupied for the two week iteration
- Not have so many items that a team member gets overwhelmed
- Under-estimate our team's total capacity, to provide room for unexpected work (e.g., support work)
- Have at least one team member assigned to each committed item on the board
:::

> The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the team's delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process that best suits their way of working to optimize for sustainable delivery.

Reviewer 3: Changes suggested by angus in an outdated review comment

```suggestion
The Sprint Board is broken down into different columns that represent the team's delivery workflow. The team owns the design of this workflow and should change the workflow process to best suit their way of working and to optimize for sustainable delivery.
```

The current queues of work represented by the board are:

- {guilabel}`Backlog` represents items that haven't been started and not in Sprint.
- {guilabel}`Refined` represents a list of items that have been refined and are ready to be worked on. The items in this queue are not committed items.
- {guilabel}`Committed` items haven't been started and are expected to be completed by end of the Sprint. These items are identified during the Iteration Planning activity.
- {guilabel}`In Progress` represents a queue of items being *actively* worked on. Each item should have at least one owner.
- {guilabel}`In Review/Blocked` contains items that need to be review before being marked as done or that cannot be completed without additional actions/support. A long list of items in this queue indicate deficiencies in the team's Refinement activity.

> - {guilabel}`Done` contains the list of items that are complete! These should be celebrated archived in the next Sprint Planning meeting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {guilabel}`Done` contains the list of items that are complete! These should be celebrated and archived in the next Sprint Planning meeting.
```

(meetings:retrospective)=
### The Retrospective Meeting

At the end of each sprint, the team holds a retrospective meeting to reflect and identify actions to improve the team's ways of working and delivery process. The retrospective is the process through which the team achieves continuous improvement for **all** their other processes.

#### The Duration of the Retrospective

> The retrospective is one hour long and is usually held on the last day of each sprint.

Author: ```suggestion
The retrospective is 45 minutes long and is usually held on the last day of each sprint.
```

Recently changed

> It is held at a time to maximise attendance from the engineering team.

Author: Are we now considering smaller retros?

Reviewer 3: I've missed out on discussion I think, but this comment seems outdated so I'll mark it as resolved with the decrease from 60 to 45 minutes.
